Tutorial chapter about configuring FastDDS middleware with XML files (#1)
IkerLuengo/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/FastDDS-Configuration/FastDDS-Configuration.rst

.. redirect-from::

    FastDDS-Configuration

Unlock all the potential of Fast-DDS as ROS 2 middleware [community-contributed]
================================================================================

**Goal:** This tutorial will show how to use the extended configuration capabilities of Fast DDS in ROS 2.

**Tutorial level:** Intermediate

**Time:** 20 minutes

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

Background
----------

> The interface between the ROS 2 stack and *Fast DDS* is provided by a ROS 2 package `rmw_fastrtps <https://github.com/ros2/rmw_fastrtps>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interface between the ROS 2 stack and *Fast DDS* is provided by the ROS 2 middleware implementation `rmw_fastrtps <https://github.com/ros2/rmw_fastrtps>`_.
```

Technically speaking there are three ROS 2 packages related with the linked repository:
* `rmw_fastrtps_shared_cpp`
* `rmw_fastrtps_cpp`
* `rmw_fastrtps_dynamic_cpp`

> This package is available in all ROS 2 distributions, both from binaries and from sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This implementation is available in all ROS 2 distributions, both from binaries and from sources.
```

ROS 2 RMW only allows for the configuration of certain middleware QoS
(see `ROS 2 QoS policies <https://index.ros.org/doc/ros2/Concepts/About-Quality-of-Service-Settings/#qos-policies>`_).
However, ``rmw_fastrtps`` offers extended configuration capabilities

> to take full advantage of the features in **Fast DDS**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to take full advantage of the features in *Fast DDS*.
```

I do not have a preference between writing Fast DDS in bold or italics, but I think it is better to be consistent throughout the tutorial

This tutorial will guide you through a series of examples explaining how to use XML files to unlock this extended configuration.

> In order to get more information about using **Fast DDS** on ROS 2, please check the `following documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/ros2/ros2.html>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to get more information about using *Fast DDS* on ROS 2, please check the `following documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/ros2/ros2.html>`__.
```

Prerequisites¶

> -------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prerequisites
-------------
```

This character also causes a warning when building the documentation

```
/home/eprosima/ROS/ros2_documentation/source/Tutorials/FastDDS-Configuration/FastDDS-Configuration.rst:34: WARNING: Title underline too short.

Prerequisites¶
-------------
```

This tutorial assumes you have a ROS 2 Foxy (or newer) installation, and that you know how to :ref:`create a package <CreatePkg>`.

> It also assumes you know how to write a :ref:`simple publisher and subscriber<CppPubSub>` and a `simple server and client<CppSrvCli>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also assumes you know how to write a :ref:`simple publisher and subscriber<CppPubSub>` and a :ref:`simple service and client<CppSrvCli>`.
```

The linked ROS 2 tutorial uses the term service instead of server (even though the example names the executable server).

> Although The examples are implemented on C++, the same concepts apply to Python packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the examples are implemented on C++, the same concepts apply to Python packages.
```

Mixing synchronous and asynchronous publications in the same node
-----------------------------------------------------------------

> On this first example, we will be creating a node with two publishers, one of them with synchronous publication mode and the other one with asynchronous publication mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On this first example, a node with two publishers, one of them with synchronous publication mode and the other one with asynchronous publication mode, will be created.
```

Create the node with the publishers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Start creating the node with both publishers. Add new source file named ``sync_async_writer.cpp`` on your package with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start creating the node with both publishers.
First, create a new package called ``sync_async_node_example_cpp``.
Add a new source file named ``sync_async_writer.cpp`` on your package with the following content:
```

            sync_message.data = "SYNC: Hello, world! " + std::to_string(count_);
            RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Synchronously publishing: '%s'", sync_message.data.c_str());
            sync_publisher_->publish(sync_message);

            auto async_message = std_msgs::msg::String();
            async_message.data = "ASYNC: Hello, world! " + std::to_string(count_);
            RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Asynchronously publishing: '%s'", async_message.data.c_str());
            async_publisher_->publish(async_message);

            count_++;
        }

        rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr timer_;
        rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr async_publisher_;
        rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr sync_publisher_;
        size_t count_;
    };

    int main(int argc, char * argv[])
    {
        rclcpp::init(argc, argv);
        rclcpp::spin(std::make_shared<SyncAsyncPublisher>());
        rclcpp::shutdown();
        return 0;
    }

Note that the synchronous publisher will be publishing on topic ``sync_topic``, while the asynchronous one will be publishing on topic ``async_topic``.

> Add a new target on the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file of your package with this code and name it ``SyncAsyncWriter``, so that you can run the node using ``ros2 run``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Add a new target on the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file of your package with this code and name it ``SyncAsyncWriter``, so that you can run the node using ``ros2 run``.
```

I suggest starting a new paragraph

If you build and run this node now, both publishers will behave the same. We still need to apply the configuration for the publication mode.

> However, this configuration will be applied on runtime suring the launch of the node, using an XML file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this node is built and run now, both publishers will behave the same, publishing asynchronously in both topics, because this is the default publication mode.
The default publication mode configuration can be changed on runtime during the node launching, using an XML file.
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Create a file with name ``SyncAsync.xml`` and the following content:

.. code-block:: XML

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
    <profiles xmlns="http://www.eprosima.com/XMLSchemas/fastRTPS_Profiles">

        <!-- default publisher profile -->
        <publisher profile_name="default_publisher" is_default_profile="true">
            <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
        </publisher>

        <!-- publisher profile for topic sync_topic -->
        <publisher profile_name="/sync_topic">
            <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
            <qos>
                <publishMode>
                    <kind>SYNCHRONOUS</kind>
                </publishMode>
            </qos>
        </publisher>

        <!-- publisher profile for topic async_topic -->
        <publisher profile_name="/async_topic">
            <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
            <qos>
                <publishMode>
                    <kind>ASYNCHRONOUS</kind>
                </publishMode>
            </qos>
        </publisher>

     </profiles>

> Not that we have a publisher profile for ``sync_topic``, and another one for ``async_topic``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that several publisher profiles are defined.
One default profile which is defined setting the ``is_default_profile`` to true, and two profiles which names coincide with those of the previously defined topics: ``sync_topic`` and ``async_topic``.
```

> Each of these profiles set the publication mode to ``SYNCHRONOUS`` or ``ASYNCHRONOUS`` accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These last two profiles set the publication mode to ``SYNCHRONOUS`` or ``ASYNCHRONOUS`` accordingly.
```

Note also that there is a default profile, and that all profiles specify a ``historyMemoryPolicy`` value.

> These are needed for the example to work, the reason will be explained later on this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note also that all profiles specify a ``historyMemoryPolicy`` value which is needed for the example to work, and the reason will be explained later on this tutorial.
```

Execute the publisher node
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You will need to export the following environment variables for the XML to be loaded:

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      export RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp
      export RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML=1

>       export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=SyncAsync.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=path/to/SyncAsync.xml
```

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      export RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp
      export RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML=1

>       export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=SyncAsync.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=path/to/SyncAsync.xml
```

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: console

      SET RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp
      SET RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML=1

>       SET FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=SyncAsync.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      SET FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=path/to/SyncAsync.xml
```

Finally, ensure you have sourced your setup files and run the node:

.. code-block:: console

>     ros2 run SyncAsyncWriter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ros2 run  sync_async_node_example_cpp SyncAsyncWriter
```

> You should see the subscribers receiving the data from the publishing node, like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see the publishers sending the data from the publishing node, like so:
```

.. code-block:: console

    [INFO] [1612972049.994630332] [minimal_publisher]: Synchronously publishing: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 0'
    [INFO] [1612972049.995097767] [minimal_publisher]: Asynchronously publishing: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 0'
    [INFO] [1612972050.494478706] [minimal_publisher]: Synchronously publishing: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 1'
    [INFO] [1612972050.494664334] [minimal_publisher]: Asynchronously publishing: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 1'
    [INFO] [1612972050.994368474] [minimal_publisher]: Synchronously publishing: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 2'

>     [INFO] [1612972050.994549851] [minimal_publisher]: Asynchronously publishing: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 2'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [INFO] [1612972049.994630332] [sync_async_publisher]: Synchronously publishing: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 0'
    [INFO] [1612972049.995097767] [sync_async_publisher]: Asynchronously publishing: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 0'
    [INFO] [1612972050.494478706] [sync_async_publisher]: Synchronously publishing: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 1'
    [INFO] [1612972050.494664334] [sync_async_publisher]: Asynchronously publishing: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 1'
    [INFO] [1612972050.994368474] [sync_async_publisher]: Synchronously publishing: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 2'
    [INFO] [1612972050.994549851] [sync_async_publisher]: Asynchronously publishing: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 2'
```

To be consistent with the node name in the source code.

Now you have a synchronous publisher and an asynchronous publisher running inside the same node.

Create a node with the subscribers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> We can create a new node with the subscribers that will listen to the ``sync_topic`` and ``async_topic`` publications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, a new node with the subscribers that will listen to the ``sync_topic`` and ``async_topic`` publications is going to be created.
```

            : Node("sync_async_subscriber")
        {
            sync_subscription_ = this->create_subscription<std_msgs::msg::String>(
                "sync_topic", 10, std::bind(&SyncAsyncSubscriber::topic_callback, this, _1));
            async_subscription_ = this->create_subscription<std_msgs::msg::String>(
                "async_topic", 10, std::bind(&SyncAsyncSubscriber::topic_callback, this, _1));
        }

    private:

        void topic_callback(const std_msgs::msg::String::SharedPtr msg) const
        {
            RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "I heard: '%s'", msg->data.c_str());
        }

        rclcpp::Subscription<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr sync_subscription_;
        rclcpp::Subscription<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr async_subscription_;
    };

    int main(int argc, char * argv[])
    {
        rclcpp::init(argc, argv);
        rclcpp::spin(std::make_shared<SyncAsyncSubscriber>());
        rclcpp::shutdown();
        return 0;
    }

Add a new target on the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file linked to this code and name it ``SyncAsyncReader``.

Add the subscriber profiles to the the XML
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> We can add configuration profiles for the subscribers in the same XML file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configuration profiles for the subscribers can be added in the same XML file.
```

> For the moment, we will set only a default profile. We will extend the subscriber profiles later on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the moment, only the default profile will be set. The subscriber profiles will be extended later on.
```

Open the ``SyncAsync.xml`` file and add the following profiles inside the ``<profiles>`` tag:

.. code-block:: XML

    <!-- subscriber profile for topic sync_topic -->
    <subscriber profile_name="default_subscriber" is_default_profile="true">
        <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
    </subscriber>

Execute the subscriber node
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With the publisher node running in one terminal, open another one and export the required environment variables for the XML to be loaded:

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      export RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp
      export RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML=1

>       export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=SyncAsync.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=path/to/SyncAsync.xml
```

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      export RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp
      export RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML=1

>       export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=SyncAsync.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=path/to/SyncAsync.xml
```

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: console

      SET RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp
      SET RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML=1

>       SET FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=SyncAsync.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      SET FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=path/to/SyncAsync.xml
```

Finally, ensure you have sourced your setup files and run the node:

.. code-block:: console

>     ros2 run SyncAsyncReader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ros2 run sync_async_node_example_cpp SyncAsyncReader
```

You should see the subscribers receiving the data from the publishing node, like so:

.. code-block:: console

    [INFO] [1612972054.495429090] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 10'
    [INFO] [1612972054.995410057] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 10'
    [INFO] [1612972055.495453494] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 11'
    [INFO] [1612972055.995396561] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 11'
    [INFO] [1612972056.495534818] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 12'
    [INFO] [1612972056.995473953] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 12'

Analysis of the example
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Configuration profiles XML
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The XML file defines several configurations for publishers and subscribers.
You can have a default publisher configuration profile and several topic-specific publisher profiles.
The only requirement is that all publisher profiles have a different name and that there is only a single default profile.
The same goes for subscribers.

> In order to define a configuration for a specific topic, just make the name of the profile to be the name of the ROS2 topic (like ``/sync_topic`` and ``/async_topic`` in the example),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to define a configuration for a specific topic, just name the profile after the ROS 2 topic name (like ``/sync_topic`` and ``/async_topic`` in the example),
```

> and ``rmw_fastrtps`` will apply the profile to all publishers and subscribers for that topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and ``rmw_fastrtps`` will apply this profile to all publishers and subscribers for that topic.
```

The default configuration profile is identified by the attribute ``is_default_profile`` set to ``true``, and acts as a fallback profile when there is no other one with a name matching the topic name.

> The environment variable ``FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE`` is used to inform ``rmw_fastrtps`` the path to the XML file with the configuration profiles to load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The environment variable ``FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE`` is used to inform *Fast DDS* of the path to the XML file with the configuration profiles to load.
```

This environment variable is technically a *Fast DDS* variable and can be used outside the ROS 2 stack scope.

RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Among all the configurable attributes, ``rmw_fastrtps`` treats ``publishMode`` and ``historyMemoryPolicy`` differently.

> By default, these values are set to ``ASYNCHRONOUS`` and ``PREALLOCATED_WITH_REALLOC``, and the values set on the XML file are ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, these values are set to ``ASYNCHRONOUS`` and ``PREALLOCATED_WITH_REALLOC`` within the ``rmw_fastrtps`` implementation, and the values set on the XML file are ignored.
```

> In order to make ``rmw_fastrtps`` use the values in the XML file, the enviranment variable ``RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML`` must be set to ``1``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to use the values in the XML file, the environment variable ``RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML`` must be set to ``1``.
```

> However, this brings another caveat: If ``RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML`` is set, but the XML file does not define

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this entails another caveat: If ``RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML`` is set, but the XML file does not define
```

> ``publishMode`` or ``historyMemoryPolicy``, these attributes take the **FastDDS** default value instead of the ``rmw_fastrtps`` default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``publishMode`` or ``historyMemoryPolicy``, these attributes take the *Fast DDS* default value instead of the ``rmw_fastrtps`` default value.
```

Previously, italic instead of bold has been used to refer to Fast DDS

> For ``historyMemoryPolicy`` this is ``PREALLOCATED``.
> 
> ``PREALLOCATED`` memory policy does not work with ROS2 topic data types, therefore, in the example we have to explicitly set the ``historyMemoryPolicy`` to a valid value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is important, specially for ``historyMemoryPolicy``, because the *Fast DDS* deafult value is ``PREALLOCATED`` which does not work with ROS2 topic data types. Therefore, in the example, a valid value for this policy has been explicitly set (``DYNAMIC``).
```

> We also have to especify a default profile for all the topics that ROS2 creates automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bear in mind that this applies to all topics that ROS 2 creates automatically, so at least a default publisher and subscriber profiles setting a valid ``historyMemoryPolicy`` have to be defined.
```

Prioritization of rmw_qos_profile_t 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ROS 2 QoS contained in `rmw_qos_profile_t <http://docs.ros2.org/latest/api/rmw/structrmw__qos__profile__t.html>`_ are always honored, unless set to ``*_SYSTEM_DEFAULT``.

> In that case, XML values (or **Fast DDS** default values in the absences of XML ones) are applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that case, XML values (or *Fast DDS* default values in the absence of XML ones) are applied.
```

This means that if any QoS in ``rmw_qos_profile_t`` is set to something other than ``*_SYSTEM_DEFAULT``, the corresponding value in the XML is ignored.

Using other FastDDS capabilities with XML
-----------------------------------------

Although we have created a node with two publishers with different configuration, it is not easy to check that they are behaving differently.

> Now that we have covered the basics of XML profiles, let's use them to configure something which has some visual effect on the nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that the basics of XML profiles have been covered, let us use them to configure something which has some visual effect on the nodes.
```

> Specifically, we will set a maximum number of matching subscribers on one of the publishers and a partition definition on the other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, a maximum number of matching subscribers on one of the publishers and a partition definition on the other will be set.
```

> Note that these are only very simple examples among all the configuration attributes that can be set on ``mrw_fastrtps`` through XML files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that these are only very simple examples among all the configuration attributes that can be tuned on ``rmw_fastrtps`` through XML files.
```

> Please refer to `this documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/xml_configuration/xml_configuration.html#xml-profiles>`__ to  see the whole list of attributes that can be configured through XML files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please refer to `*Fast DDS* documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/xml_configuration/xml_configuration.html#xml-profiles>`__ to  see the whole list of attributes that can be configured through XML files.
```

Limiting the number of matching subscribers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Add the maximum number of matched subscribers to the profile of the ``/async_topic`` publisher. It should look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a maximum number of matched subscribers to the ``/async_topic`` publisher profile. It should look like this:
```

.. code-block:: XML

    <!-- publisher profile for topic async_topic -->
    <publisher profile_name="/async_topic">
        <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
        <qos>
            <publishMode>
                <kind>ASYNCHRONOUS</kind>
            </publishMode>
        </qos>
        <matchedSubscribersAllocation>
            <initial>0</initial>
            <maximum>1</maximum>
            <increment>1</increment>
        </matchedSubscribersAllocation>
    </publisher>

> We are limiting the number of matching subscribers to one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The number of matching subscribers is being limited to one.
```

> Now open three terminals. Do not forget to source the setup files and to set the required environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Now open three terminals and do not forget to source the setup files and to set the required environment variables.
```

I suggest beginning a new paragraph

**Goal:** This tutorial will show how to use the extended configuration capabilities of Fast DDS in ROS 2.

**Tutorial level:** Intermediate

**Time:** 20 minutes

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

Background
----------

The interface between the ROS 2 stack and *Fast DDS* is provided by the ROS 2 middleware implementation `rmw_fastrtps <https://github.com/ros2/rmw_fastrtps>`_.
This implementation is available in all ROS 2 distributions, both from binaries and from sources.

ROS 2 RMW only allows for the configuration of certain middleware QoS
(see `ROS 2 QoS policies <https://index.ros.org/doc/ros2/Concepts/About-Quality-of-Service-Settings/#qos-policies>`_).
However, ``rmw_fastrtps`` offers extended configuration capabilities
to take full advantage of the features in *Fast DDS*.
This tutorial will guide you through a series of examples explaining how to use XML files to unlock this extended configuration.

In order to get more information about using *Fast DDS* on ROS 2, please check the `following documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/ros2/ros2.html>`__.

Prerequisites
-------------

> This tutorial assumes you have a ROS 2 Foxy (or newer) installation, and that you know how to :ref:`create a package <CreatePkg>`.

Reviewer: This tutorial does not work with ROS 2 Foxy. For this tutorial to work with ROS 2 Foxy the ros2/rmw_fastrtps#335 and ros2/rmw_fastrtps#497 should be backported to the foxy branch. Right now, this tutorial only works in ROS 2 Rolling and newer installations.

Note that these are only very simple examples among all the configuration attributes that can be tuned on ``rmw_fastrtps`` through XML files.
Please refer to `*Fast DDS* documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/xml_configuration/xml_configuration.html#xml-profiles>`__ to  see the whole list of attributes that can be configured through XML files.

Limiting the number of matching subscribers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Add a maximum number of matched subscribers to the ``/async_topic`` publisher profile.
It should look like this:

.. code-block:: XML

    <!-- publisher profile for topic async_topic -->
    <publisher profile_name="/async_topic">
        <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
        <qos>
            <publishMode>
                <kind>ASYNCHRONOUS</kind>
            </publishMode>
        </qos>
        <matchedSubscribersAllocation>
            <initial>0</initial>
            <maximum>1</maximum>
            <increment>1</increment>
        </matchedSubscribersAllocation>
    </publisher>

The number of matching subscribers is being limited to one.

> Now open three terminals and do not forget to source the setup files and to set the required environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Now open three terminals and do not forget to source the setup files and to set the required environment variables.
```

I'd suggest starting a new paragraph with the instructions to run this example

On the first terminal run the publisher node, and the subscriber node on the other two.

> You should see that only the first subscriber node is receiving the messages. The second one could not complete the matching process because the publisher prevented it, as it had already reached its maximum of matched publishers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see that only the first subscriber node is receiving the messages from both topics.
The second one could not complete the matching process in the ``/async_topic`` because the publisher prevented it, as it had already reached its maximum of matched publishers.
Consequently, only the messages from the ``/sync_topic`` are going to be received in this third terminal:

.. code-block:: console

[INFO] [1613127657.088860890] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 18'
[INFO] [1613127657.588896594] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 19'
[INFO] [1613127658.088849401] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 20'
```

Using partitions within the topic
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> We can use the partitions feature to control which publishers and subscribers exchange information within the same topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The partitions feature can be used to control which publishers and subscribers exchange information within the same topic.
```

> Let's change the ``/sync_topic`` publisher to partition ``part1`` while the ``/sync_topic`` subscriber is moved to partition ``part2``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us change the ``/sync_topic`` publisher to partition ``part1`` and create a new ``/sync_topic`` subscriber which uses partition ``part2``.
```

                    <name>part2</name>
                </names>
            </partition>
        </qos>
    </subscriber>

Open two terminals. Do not forget to source the setup files and to set the required environment variables.
On the first terminal run the publisher node, and the subscriber node on the other one.
You should see that only the ``/async_topic`` messages are reaching the subscriber.
The ``/sync_topic`` subscriber is not receiving the data as it is in a different partition from the corresponding publisher.

.. code-block:: console

    [INFO] [1612972054.995410057] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 10'
    [INFO] [1612972055.995396561] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 11'
    [INFO] [1612972056.995473953] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'ASYNC: Hello, world! 12'

Configuring a service and a client
----------------------------------

Services and clients have a publisher and a subscriber each, that communicate through two different topics.
For example, for a service named ``ping`` there is:

* A service subscriber listening to requests on ``/rq/ping``.
* A service publisher sending responses on ``/rr/ping``.

> * A client publisher sending requests to requests on ``/rq/ping``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A client publisher sending requests on ``/rq/ping``.
```

* A client subscriber listening to responses on ``/rr/ping``.

> Although you can use these topic names to set the configuration profiles on the XML, sometimes you want to apply the same profile to all services or clients on a node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although you can use these topic names to set the configuration profiles on the XML, sometimes you may wish to apply the same profile to all services or clients on a node.
```

> Instead of copying the same profile with all topic names generated for all services, you can just create a publisher and subscriber profile pair named ``service``, and another pair named ``client``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of copying the same profile with all topic names generated for all services, you can just create a publisher and subscriber profile pair named ``service``. The same can be done for clients creating a pair named ``client``.
```

Create the nodes with the service and client
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Start creating the node with the service. Add new source file named ``ping_service.cpp`` on your package with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start creating the node with the service. Add a new source file named ``ping_service.cpp`` on your package with the following content:
```

.. code-block:: C++

    #include "rclcpp/rclcpp.hpp"
    #include "example_interfaces/srv/trigger.hpp"

    #include <memory>

    void ping(const std::shared_ptr<example_interfaces::srv::Trigger::Request> request,
            std::shared_ptr<example_interfaces::srv::Trigger::Response> response)
    {

>         response->success = true;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        (void)request;
        response->success = true;
```

Avoid unused parameter warning

>         RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "Incoming request");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("ping_server"), "Incoming request");
```

>         RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "sending back response");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("ping_server"), "Sending back response");
```

    }

    int main(int argc, char **argv)
    {
        rclcpp::init(argc, argv);

        std::shared_ptr<rclcpp::Node> node = rclcpp::Node::make_shared("ping_server");

        rclcpp::Service<example_interfaces::srv::Trigger>::SharedPtr service =
            node->create_service<example_interfaces::srv::Trigger>("ping", &ping);

>         RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "Ready to serve.");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("ping_server"), "Ready to serve.");
```

        rclcpp::spin(node);
        rclcpp::shutdown();
    }

Create the client on a file named ``ping_client.cpp`` with the following content:

.. code-block:: C++

    #include "rclcpp/rclcpp.hpp"
    #include "example_interfaces/srv/trigger.hpp"

    #include <chrono>
    #include <cstdlib>
    #include <memory>

    using namespace std::chrono_literals;

    int main(int argc, char **argv)
    {
        rclcpp::init(argc, argv);

        std::shared_ptr<rclcpp::Node> node = rclcpp::Node::make_shared("ping_client");
        rclcpp::Client<example_interfaces::srv::Trigger>::SharedPtr client =
            node->create_client<example_interfaces::srv::Trigger>("ping");

        auto request = std::make_shared<example_interfaces::srv::Trigger::Request>();

        while (!client->wait_for_service(1s)) {
            if (!rclcpp::ok()) {

>             RCLCPP_ERROR(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "Interrupted while waiting for the service. Exiting.");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            RCLCPP_ERROR(rclcpp::get_logger("ping_client"), "Interrupted while waiting for the service. Exiting.");
```

            return 0;
            }

>             RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "service not available, waiting again...");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("ping_client"), "Service not available, waiting again...");
```

        }

>         RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "Sending request");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("ping_client"), "Sending request");
```

        auto result = client->async_send_request(request);
        // Wait for the result.
        if (rclcpp::spin_until_future_complete(node, result) ==
            rclcpp::FutureReturnCode::SUCCESS)
        {

>             RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "Response received");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("ping_client"), "Response received");
```

        } else {

>             RCLCPP_ERROR(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "Failed to call service ping");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            RCLCPP_ERROR(rclcpp::get_logger("ping_client"), "Failed to call service ping");
```

        }

        rclcpp::shutdown();
        return 0;
    }

Add a new target on the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file linked to the server code and name it ``ping_service``.
Do the same with a new target named ``ping_client`` and the client code.
Finally, build the package.

Create the XML profiles for the service and client
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Create a file with name ``ping.xml`` and the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a file with name ``ping.xml`` with the following content:
```

        <!-- default publisher profile -->
        <publisher profile_name="default_publisher" is_default_profile="true">
            <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
        </publisher>

        <!-- default subscriber profile -->
        <subscriber profile_name="default_subscriber" is_default_profile="true">
            <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
        </subscriber>

        <!-- service publisher is SYNC -->
        <publisher profile_name="service">
            <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
            <qos>
                <publishMode>
                    <kind>SYNCHRONOUS</kind>
                </publishMode>
            </qos>
        </publisher>

        <!-- client publisher is ASYNC -->
        <publisher profile_name="client">
            <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
            <qos>
                <publishMode>
                    <kind>ASYNCHRONOUS</kind>
                </publishMode>
            </qos>
        </publisher>

    </profiles>

This configuration file sets the publication mode to ``SYNCHRONOUS`` on the service and to ``ASYNCHRONOUS`` on the client.

> Note that we are only defining the publisher profiles for bot the service and the client, but subscriber profiles could be provided too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that we are only defining the publisher profiles for both the service and the client, but subscriber profiles could be provided too.
```

Execute the nodes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Open two terminals and source the setup files on each one.

> Then set the required environment variables for the XML to load:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then set the required environment variables for the XML to be loaded:
```

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    .. code-block:: console

      export RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp
      export RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML=1

>       export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=SyncAsync.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=path/to/ping.xml
```

  .. group-tab:: macOS

    .. code-block:: console

      export RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp
      export RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML=1

>       export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=SyncAsync.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=path/to/ping.xml
```

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    .. code-block:: console

      SET RMW_IMPLEMENTATION=rmw_fastrtps_cpp
      SET RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML=1

>       SET FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=SyncAsync.xml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      SET FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=path/to/ping.xml
```

On the first terminal run the service node.

> You should see the service waiting for requests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. code-block:: console

    ros2 run sync_async_node_example_cpp ping_service

You should see the service waiting for requests:
```

.. code-block:: console

    [INFO] [1612977403.805799037] [ping_server]: Ready to serve

On the second terminal, run the client node.

> You should see the client sending the request and receiving the response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. code-block:: console

    ros2 run sync_async_node_example_cpp ping_client

You should see the client sending the request and receiving the response:
```

.. code-block:: console

>     [INFO] [1612977404.805799037] [ping_client]: Sending request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [INFO] [1612977404.805799037] [ping_client]: Sending request
    [INFO] [1613373614.312229535] [ping_client]: Response received
```

At the same time, the output in the server console has been updated:

.. code-block:: console

    [INFO] [1612977403.805799037] [ping_server]: Ready to serve
    [INFO] [1612977404.807314904] [ping_server]: Incoming request

>     [INFO] [1612977404.836405125] [ping_server]: sending back response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [INFO] [1612977404.836405125] [ping_server]: Sending back response
```

            sync_publisher_->publish(sync_message);

            auto async_message = std_msgs::msg::String();
            async_message.data = "ASYNC: Hello, world! " + std::to_string(count_);
            RCLCPP_INFO(this->get_logger(), "Asynchronously publishing: '%s'", async_message.data.c_str());
            async_publisher_->publish(async_message);

            count_++;
        }

        rclcpp::TimerBase::SharedPtr timer_;
        rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr async_publisher_;
        rclcpp::Publisher<std_msgs::msg::String>::SharedPtr sync_publisher_;
        size_t count_;
    };

    int main(int argc, char * argv[])
    {
        rclcpp::init(argc, argv);
        rclcpp::spin(std::make_shared<SyncAsyncPublisher>());
        rclcpp::shutdown();
        return 0;
    }

Note that the synchronous publisher will be publishing on topic ``sync_topic``, while the asynchronous one will be publishing on topic ``async_topic``.

Add a new target on the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file of your package with this code and name it ``SyncAsyncWriter``, so that you can run the node using ``ros2 run``.

> If this node is built and run this node now, both publishers will behave the same, publishing asynchronously in both topics, because this is the default publication mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this node is built and run now, both publishers will behave the same, publishing asynchronously in both topics, because this is the default publication mode.
```

The environment variable ``FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE`` is used to inform *Fast DDS* the path to the XML file with the configuration profiles to load.

RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Among all the configurable attributes, ``rmw_fastrtps`` treats ``publishMode`` and ``historyMemoryPolicy`` differently.
By default, these values are set to ``ASYNCHRONOUS`` and ``PREALLOCATED_WITH_REALLOC`` within the ``rmw_fastrtps`` implementation, and the values set on the XML file are ignored.
In order to use the values in the XML file, the environment variable ``RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML`` must be set to ``1``.

However, this entails another caveat: If ``RMW_FASTRTPS_USE_QOS_FROM_XML`` is set, but the XML file does not define
``publishMode`` or ``historyMemoryPolicy``, these attributes take the *Fast DDS* default value instead of the ``rmw_fastrtps`` default value.
This is important, specially for ``historyMemoryPolicy``, because the *Fast DDS* deafult value is ``PREALLOCATED`` which does not work with ROS2 topic data types.
Therefore, in the example, a valid value for this policy has been explicitly set (``DYNAMIC``).

> 
> ``PREALLOCATED`` memory policy does not work with ROS2 topic data types, therefore, in the example we have to explicitly set the ``historyMemoryPolicy`` to a valid value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Limiting the number of matching subscribers
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Add a maximum number of matched subscribers to the ``/async_topic`` publisher profile.
It should look like this:

.. code-block:: XML

    <!-- publisher profile for topic async_topic -->
    <publisher profile_name="/async_topic">
        <historyMemoryPolicy>DYNAMIC</historyMemoryPolicy>
        <qos>
            <publishMode>
                <kind>ASYNCHRONOUS</kind>
            </publishMode>
        </qos>
        <matchedSubscribersAllocation>
            <initial>0</initial>
            <maximum>1</maximum>
            <increment>1</increment>
        </matchedSubscribersAllocation>
    </publisher>

The number of matching subscribers is being limited to one.

Now open three terminals and do not forget to source the setup files and to set the required environment variables.
On the first terminal run the publisher node, and the subscriber node on the other two.

> You should see that only the first subscriber node is receiving the messages from both topids.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should see that only the first subscriber node is receiving the messages from both topics.
```

The second one could not complete the matching process in the ``/async_topic`` because the publisher prevented it, as it had already reached its maximum of matched publishers.
Consequently, only the messages from the ``/sync_topic`` are going to be received in this third terminal:

.. code-block:: console

> [INFO] [1613127657.088860890] [sync_async_subscriber]: I heard: 'SYNC: Hello, world! 18'

Reviewer: Insert blank line to prevent warning
